---
layout: default
title:  Is God a Marxist-Feminist? A Compassionate Reading of Deuteronomy
date:   2012-05-02 00:00:00
categories: main
published: true
---

The Book of Deuteronomy in the Bible, framed as an eloquent farewell speech from Moses to the people of Israel, can be seen as the founding document or constitution of ancient Israel.<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup> And yet, when the laws in Deuteronomy are compared with their older counterparts in the Book of Exodus, they reveal that Israel’s polity was not static, but dynamic, involving continuous interpretation in response to a changing cultural atmosphere.

In this essay, I will argue that the way in which the laws in Deuteronomy expand upon and interpret the laws in Exodus suggests that the underlying social vision of Deuteronomy is an ethic of compassion — what some biblical scholars have deemed “theocentric humanism.”<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>  I will begin by briefly situating the context of the laws in Deuteronomy in relation to those of Exodus. I will then offer a literary analysis of three key texts in Deuteronomy, highlighting their humanitarian concern by contrasting them with their original statements (or lack thereof) in Exodus. By identifying the compassionate ethical reasoning employed in these paradigmatic texts in Deuteronomy, we can see how they reveal Israel’s God to be essentially loving and compassionate, with a special heart for the least powerful members of society.

### The Context of Deuteronomy
There are several indicators in the text of Deuteronomy which make it reasonable to see the laws therein as a later expansion and interpretation of the laws found in Exodus. First, Deuteronomy was clearly written after the people of Israel had been in the Promised Land for a significant amount of time – long enough for interpretation of the laws in Exodus to have taken place. For example, the book opens by saying, “these are the words Moses spoke…east of the Jordan” (Deut. 1:1 [NIV 2011]). The fact that the author takes care to mention the location as “east of the Jordan” assumes that the audience is *not* currently east of the Jordan. In other words, they are currently in the Promised Land (which is west of the Jordan), and have been there long enough for this reminder to be necessary. The implication is that the audience is a newer generation of people with no direct memory of Moses giving the laws found in Exodus.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup> Secondly, and more crucially, Deuteronomy 1:5 frames everything that follows by saying that “Moses began to expound this law.” Since “this law” here is referring to the laws in the Book of Exodus, this is strong evidence that Deuteronomy is claiming to be a later, yet authoritative, restatement and interpretation of the earlier laws in Exodus.<sup id="a4">[4](#f4)</sup>

### Debts and Servants
Beginning our analysis with Deuteronomy 15:1-18, we see laws concerning the canceling of debts and freeing of servants. Creditors are to “cancel any loan they have made to a fellow Israelite” at “the end of every seven years” (Deut. 15:1-2). Similarly, for those who own Hebrew servants, “in the seventh year you must let them go free” (Deut. 15:12). That the laws about canceling debts and freeing servants are grouped together here makes sense because people would *become* servants by selling themselves into debt: “If any of your people — Hebrew men or women — sell themselves to you and serve you…” (Deut. 15:12). In Exodus 21:2, we see the original statement of this law: “If you buy a Hebrew servant, he is to serve you for six years. But in the seventh year, he shall go free, without paying anything.” By comparing the two sets of laws, a few fascinating differences come to light. First, while the law in Exodus 21 is applied only to a male servant — “only the man shall go free” (v.4) — its restatement in Deuteronomy applies to “men or women.” Second, as Michael Coogan notes, “in Exodus 21.2, after six years the Hebrew slave is simply released; in Deuteronomy 15.12-15, he is also to be given abundant gifts.”<sup id="a5">[5](#f5)</sup>  Indeed, throughout Deuteronomy we get the impression that a spirit of generosity is supposed to be extended far beyond the specific laws. For instance, God instructs the people “to be openhanded toward your fellow Israelites who are poor and needy” and “not send them away empty-handed” but rather to give to them “liberally…as the LORD your God has blessed you” (Deut. 15:11, 13, 14). Crucial also is the *reason* given for obeying the law in Deuteronomy, which is not even present in Exodus: “Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the LORD your God redeemed you. That is why I give you this command today” (Deut. 15:15). Thus, we can see that at the heart of the laws in Deuteronomy is an ethic of compassion.

### Festival laws
Moving on to another text, Deuteronomy 16:1-17, we see laws concerning three festivals: The Festival of Unleavened Bread (also known as Passover), the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Tabernacles. Most important to note for our purpose is *who* is allowed to celebrate the festivals: “you, your sons and daughters, your male and female servants, the Levites in your towns, and the foreigners, and fatherless and the widows living among you” (Deut. 16:11). In short, special care is taken to include the especially vulnerable classes in Israelite society. Coogan observes that the Levites, Israel’s special tribe of priests, are included in this list because of a reform issued by King Josiah, in which all worship “was to take place only at the central sanctuary.”<sup id="a6">[6](#f6)</sup> This means that many Levites “who had earned their livelihood by officiating at local shrines would now be unemployed” and thus they “are a needy and protected class, often grouped with slaves, strangers, orphans, and widows.”<sup id="a7">[7](#f7)</sup>  By contrast, in the original statement of these laws in Exodus 23:14-17, only men are mentioned (Exod. 23:17). Also again lacking in the Exodus version is a reason for obeying the law, while in Deuteronomy we see that the reason is again rooted in compassionate remembrance of slavery in Egypt (Deut. 16:12).

### Harvest laws
Finally, there are a small set of laws in Deuteronomy 24:19-21, which in fact have no counterparts in the Exodus laws. These concern compassionate harvesting restrictions: “When you are harvesting in your field and you overlook a sheaf, do not go back to get it. Leave it for the foreigner, the fatherless and the widow” (Deut. 24:19). Identical laws are repeated for harvesting olive tree branches and grapes (Deut. 24:20, 21). Once more, we see compassionate laws, but more importantly, compassionate reasons for obeying them: “Remember that you were slaves in Egypt. That is why I command you to do this” (Deut. 24:22).<sup id="a8">[8](#f8)</sup>

### Conclusion
In the laws in Deuteronomy, then, we see an undeniably strong theme of compassion emerge. Indeed, Coogan notes that these laws arguably “offer something of a populist program”; they have “more of a humanitarian cast” than those found in Exodus, since, in them, “the persons to be shown special attention are the least powerful members of society”.<sup id="a9">[9](#f9)</sup>  It is thus regrettable that too many moderns see in the Hebrew Bible only oppression and violence. On the contrary, the compassionate social vision of Deuteronomy, whose polity is foundational to the rest of the Bible, should reframe our reading of any seemingly oppressive texts.<sup id="a10">[10](#f10)</sup>  Indeed, Deuteronomy is a timely and powerful reminder to modern people living in first world economies that, “to refuse help and compassion to the poor and needy is to act like Pharaoh, not like God: acts of economic injustice enslave; they do not liberate.”<sup id="a11">[11](#f11)</sup>

### Notes
<sup id="f1">1</sup> Samuel Balentine, for instance, notes that “the most distinctive feature of the Book of Deuteronomy is its self-conscious claim to the be authoritative *torah* [law] of God mediated through Moses to Israel. No other book of the Pentateuch refers to itself as *torah*”. Samuel E. Balentine, *The Torah’s Vision of Worship* (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1999), 184-5. [↵](#a1)

<sup id="f2">2</sup> Samuel Balentine, *The Torah’s Vision of Worship*, 184. [↵](#a2)

<sup id="f3">3</sup> In fact, there are numerous features in the text which suggest that Deuteronomy was even written after Moses’ death. For instance, Moses is referred to in the third person throughout the book, he is only referred to as having spoken the words (i.e. which someone else then wrote down), and the book includes a description of his death (Deut. 34). [↵](#a3)

<sup id="f4">4</sup> See, for example, agreement with this basic thesis in Samuel Balentine: “In Deuteronomy, old laws are not simply codified…instead, they are “preached” in a way that brings them up to date and makes them applicable to new situations.” Samuel Balentine, *The Torah’s Vision of Worship*, 182. [↵](#a4)

<sup id="f5">5</sup> Michael D. Coogan, *A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in Its Context* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 152. [↵](#a5)

<sup id="f6">6</sup> Ibid., 153. [↵](#a6)

<sup id="f7">7</sup> Ibid. [↵](#a7)

<sup id="f8">8</sup> We see a beautiful example of this law being put into practice elsewhere in the Bible, by the compassionate man Boaz to the foreigner woman Ruth, in the moving narrative in the Book of Ruth (cf. Ruth 2). [↵](#a8)

<sup id="f9">9</sup> Ibid., 152. [↵](#a9)

<sup id="f10">10</sup> As Brevard Childs notes: “Deuteronomy…serves as a commentary on how future generations are to approach the law”. Brevard S. Childs, *Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture* (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1979), 224. [↵](#a10)

<sup id="f11">11</sup> Samuel Balentine, *The Torah’s Vision of Worship*, 196. [↵](#a11)
